# Help for GemiNaut

GemiNaut is a user friendly GUI client for the Gemini and Gopher protocols by Luke Emmet. It aims to provide a comfortable and user friendly experience of Gemini on Windows.

In many ways it behaves just like a normal web browser, except it is for viewing gemini:// or gopher:// pages.

* Send feedback to luke [at] marmaladefoo [dot] com

GemiNaut has its own Gemini site:

=> gemini://gemini.marmaladefoo.com/geminaut GemiNaut home page

### What is Gemini?

Gemini is a protocol and text format designed to radically simplify the experience of writing and sharing hypertext content on the Internet. 

=> gemini://gemini.circumlunar.space Gemini Project home
=> https://gemini.circumlunar.space Gemini Project home (www)

Gopher is a simpler text and link based format that is one of the inspirations behind Gemini.

### Key Features of GemiNaut

* Attractive GUI with familiar browser navigation features
* Keyboard shortcuts wheelmouse scroll and zoom
* Smooth content wrap and flow
* Preformatted text, quotation, bullet and heading styling
* Fast history navigation remembering page scroll offset
* Content theming engine - view the same content in different visual modes
* Automatic site based themes - help to distinguish one site from another
* Easily distinguish external links (e.g. to HTTP web servers) from the link style
* View source
* Auto-linking URLs in Gopher text files
* Page based table of contents
* Bookmarks
* Option to view a simplified rendering of linked web pages
* Client certificates

These are described in more detail below.

### Familiar browser design

GemiNaut provides a usable and familiar browsing experience for exploring Geminispace. Using your keyboard and mouse you click on links and use the back/forward/home buttons.

You can use your wheelmouse to scroll or to zoom in and out (Ctrl+Wheelmouse) and use Alt+cursor keys to navigate back and forwards. Use Tab to step through the links.

You can set your own home page via the "View->Settings->Set home page" menu.

### Smooth content wrap and flow

Gemini/GMI content from servers will be shown wrapped to your current window. 

* Bullets and links are indented as expected 

### Content theming engine

GemiNaut has a number of rendering themes to present the content. This allows themes to be readily developed. These include:

* Fabric (default) - a site-specific theme that shows each Gemini site with a slightly different visual theme - described below. It also shows a table of contents for those pages that have a heading structure.
* Fabric (classic) - a previous Fabric theme that uses Gravatar for its identicons.
* Dark - a variable font theme whose colours are inspired by dark themes of code editors.
* Plain - a simple plain text theme, black text on a white background.
* Terminal - a monospaced terminal theme - white text on a black background.

To switch between themes, choose the options below the "View->Themes" menu.

If you are familiar with HTML and CSS, you can create your own theme by adding an HTML and CSS file with the same name into the GmiConverters/themes folder. Use the existing themes as the basis for your own.

### Site specific themes

A unique feature of GemiNaut is its ability to create site specific themes. Unlike HTML pages on the web, Gemini pages (GMI) do not have visual style information. This is an intentional part of Gemini's design and keeps everything simple.

You can use one of the generic themes (e.g. Dark, Plain, Terminal) to view all content in GemiNaut. However these themes do not visually distinguish one site from another. So it is harder to determine when you traverse from one site to another - this can only be confirmed by looking at the address bar.

The Fabric theme provides a solution to this problem by automatically creating a unique theme for each Gemini site. Each site will be distinguished by:

* Page background - a "fabric" unique to the current site, as if the page is laid out on a different fabric background, like a tablecloth.
* Page marker - a unique placemarker icon for each site in the top right hand corner. You can click the page marker to go to the "home" of each site.

Sites are identified as follows:

* If the URL contains /users/<username> or /~<username> then this is taken to be a user specific sub-site, and the theme will be specific to that user on that server.
* Otherwise, the domain is used to determine the theme.

### Link styles

Link types in GemiNaut can be easily distinguished:

⇒ Gemini links start with a "fat" arrow. These will open in GemiNaut.
⇝ External links have a "squiggly" arrow. These will open in the system web browser (or you can turn on display of web pages - see below).

Images can be viewed, and linked binary files are downloaded.

### View source

You can view the source of any GMI page via the "View->Source" menu.

### Client Certificates/Identities

Some Gemini sites will require you to present a client certificate to access the content. This is similar to "logging in" to a website. In Gemini, however, you are in control of which sites to present a certificate.

You can create as many client certificates as you like, and you can use the same certificate on many sites. When you create a certificate you need to provide a name for it, typically this will be your chosen username, although you can call them whatever you want. 

Once you have created a certificate, choose it within the menu when you are on a site, and GemiNaut will use it for subsequent requests within the current session.  It will be shown with a tick in its menu to indicate it is the active certificate for the current site.

Client certificates are stored in the "certificates" folder beneath the user profile for GemiNaut.

### Bookmarks

GemiNaut has a simple bookmarks system. You can add the current page to your bookmarks, via the bookmarks menu.

You can also edit your bookmarks using a simple text window. The bookmarks are stored using Gemini's text format, so each link starts "=> ". Other line types can be included in the bookmarks text, but only the links are shown in the bookmarks menu.

Create a break between sections of bookmarks with a line of hyphens or underscores (two or more).

### Using GemiNaut as a Small Web browser

GemiNaut can convert web pages to gemtext and display them directly. This works with many simple web pages that do not need authentication, forms, cookies or videos to work correctly (aka The Small Web).

To access this feature change the option in View->Settings. You can either use the internal converter, or connect to a HTTP proxy for Gemini, such as Duckling Proxy:

=> https://github.com/LukeEmmet/duckling-proxy Duckling Proxy

Otherwise web links will be opened in the system web browser. 

Even with GemiNaut set to display web pages, you can open any web link in the system web browser by Ctrl-Clicking on the link.

## Acknowledgements

GemiNaut makes use of a number of third party libraries and utilities:

=> https://github.com/rebol/rebol Rebol 
=> https://github.com/rafallopatka/ToastNotifications/issues ToastNotifications
=> https://github.com/dmester/jdenticon-net/ Jdenticon-net - .NET library to generate identicons

